From: em.logi.2f.3ec621.a9d1749b@editorialmanager.com [em.logi.2f.3ec621.a9d1749b@editorialmanager.com] on behalf of Frank Veltman [em@editorialmanager.com]
Sent: Tuesday, October 28, 2014 11:22 AM
To: Evans, Richard
Subject: Your Submission to the JPL (LOGI-D-14-00058)

Dear Professor Richard Prideaux Evans,

I am writing concerning the manuscript

"Cathoristic Logic,"

which you submitted to the JPL.

The editors have considered this paper carefully and, I'm sorry to
say, have decided not to accept it for publication.

This decision was based on one or more referee reports, which you can
find either below, or by following the links that appear below, or in
your manuscript's file at the JPL website. As you will see the
referee's advise is a "revise and resubmit", but the revisions (s)he
wants you to make amount to writing a entirely new paper, so I think a
"reject" is more appropriate.

Thank you for giving us the opportunity to consider your work, and we
are sorry to have this bad news to you. We would be happy to consider
other work of yours in the future.

Best regards,

Frank Veltman

Editor,
Journal of Philosophical Logic
http://www.springer.com/philosophy/logic/journal/10992



Comments for the Author:

Reviewer #1: I recommend the paper be revised and resubmitted.

The main motivation for cathoristic logic seems to be that natural
language can be represented in it while the complexity of solving
certain computational problems is relatively simple, such as checking
validity is in quadratic time. This is contrasted with first-order
logic, where formulas that trepresent the same information are less
succinct and computational problems are obviously much more complex.

The paper is much too long. The length of the paper is 77 pages,
which is much longer than usual for the journal of philosophical
logic. It will probably mean that few people will actually read the
paper if it were published. I do believe the core of the paper could
be reworked to a paper of more pallatable length. This would be much
better in order to reach a larger audience.

A rewritten paper should have a clear goal, which should always be
referred back to. Now, the paper contains very many and diverse
results and it is not entirely clear why these results are
interesting. What goal do they serve? Is the standard translation
interesting because it shows what fragment of first-order logic can be
expressed? If so, how does it compare to other fragments of
first-order logic? Why are the open problems interesting? I would also
recommend that the paper is concluded by a section "Conclusion", which
returns to the goal set out in the introduction and evaluates to what
extent the goal has been reached and what open issues still remain.

The author should also think about why this paper is suitable for the
journal of philosophical logic and set the goal of the paper with that in
mind. It seems a large part of the intended audience is those
researchers working on representing natural language and those
involved in knowledge representation. Perhaps there is another journal
which would make it easier to reach that audience.

Below I list some other concerns.

The author seems to ignore that first-order logic can also have
functions, and then the first example on page 5 could be represented
as king(france)=pierre, where it is clear that there can only be one
king, or colour(tl)=red, where it is clear that the traffic light can
only have one colour.

On page 1 a reference to Hennesy Milner Logic should be added.

I do not think the author argues convincingly that incompatibility is
prior to negation. It is even unclear to me what this means. Does the
author mean we cannot understand negation without first understanding
incompatibility? Does the author mean we cannot define negation
without incompatibility? Does the author mean that in our cognitive
development we grasp incompatibility before negation? All these
interpretations of priority seem problematic, and the author does not
argue for any of these convincingly. I think this entire issue is not
relevant for the paper. The author states at the bottom of page 8 that
it will be assumed -without further argument -that incompatibility is
prior to negation. This assumption plays no role in the paper. Nothing
in the rest of the paper has to change if negation is prior to incompatibiliy.

The syntax of first-order logic given on page 13 is not used on page
5. The predicate "king" is not capitalized, nor is "colour". The case
for conjunction is given as "phi \wedge \psi". This should be "(\phi
\wedge \phi)". The same holds for definition 1 on page 14.

On page 17 "contradictories" should be replaced by "contradictions"

On page 17
\langle a \rangle \langle b \rangle \wedge \langle a \rangle \langle b
\rangle \models \langle a \rangle ( \langle b \rangle \wedge \rangle c
\langle)

should be

\langle a \rangle \langle b \rangle \wedge \langle a \rangle \langle c
\rangle \models \langle a \rangle ( \langle b \rangle \wedge \rangle c
\langle)

(The second occurence of "b" should be "c".

I did not find the section on entailment between atomic sentences very
convincing. The inference of <jack><loves><jill> very much depends on
word order in English. There are other languages in which it would be
<jack><jill><loves>. But then it does not follow that <jack><loves>.
Adverbial inference have the same problem, also in English. From
<jack><quickly><went><home> it does not follow that
<jack><went><home>. Even if this could be solved, the language would
also contain many expressions that do have semantics in the formal
system, but would actually not express anything in natural language,
such as <jack>, or <jack><passed><biscuit><to>. So even though there
are some inferences that actually work for atomic sentences, there is
no separate grammar for what even counts as an atomic sentence.

The comparison to first-order logic is made, but this does not seem
fair. As mentioned above, functions in first-order logic are not used,
and there are also hidden assumptions in cathoristic logic, for
instance that modalities are functional (diamond implies box). This is
also why bisimulations and two-way similations coincide.

The general impression that I get is that there are nice results on
natural language, that have actually been implemented as well, but
that it seems the modal setting does not really fit the purposes.


